---
description: These are gaps in the literature observed while conducting this study that can be considereed for future projects.
tags:
  - research
  - aarp
  - overview
enableTOC: true
draft: false
---

# Future Research

## Longitudinal Studies on Coverage Transitions

Conduct longitudinal studies on coverage transitions, assess the equitable impact of digital health interventions, and perform deeper intersectional analyses of compounded disadvantages. A specific focus should be placed on vulnerable subgroups who are most at risk of losing coverage or experiencing underinsurance with the changes in policy within the government. The research indicates that the gap in coverage between [[Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance (ESI)|ESI]] and [[Medicare]] is going to widen and deepen. We believe that looking closer/deeper at the different health insurance financing strategies would be a worthy endeavor.

## Effectiveness of Digital Health Interventions on Equity

Investigate the specific impact of telehealth, artificial intelligence, and other digital health tools on health equity for older adults. This research should identify best practices for inclusive implementation and pinpoint persistent barriers to access that need to be overcome.

## Intersectional Disparities Analysis

Commission deeper, intersectional research into the compounded effects of multiple demographic disadvantages (e.g., being rural, low-income, Native American, and having a disability) on health insurance access, utilization, and health outcomes for aging adults. This will provide a more nuanced understanding of complex vulnerabilities.'

## The Effects of Climate Change on Health Insurance and Outcomes

Though noted in the [[4.4 Environmental|Environmental]] analysis, the direct links between health insurance coverage and environmental changes are not currently studied. With climate change proliferating and the US cutting back on climate protection, this line of investigation will only become more essential.

## More Current Disability Research

Our search found articles about disability in health insurance coverage from the pre-pandemic years, but it seems as though this line of inquiry has been largely left unexplored post pandemic. This is a limitation of this study and future research would benefit from further investigation.


## Gaps in Data Collection

Certain report-generating institutions (e.g., Statista, MRI-Simmons, etc.) were unavailable to the general public, and we also found difficulty in accessing their reports.

Other data sets were limited in their use due to the need for heavy analysis software and training. Because of this, we found difficulty in pulling out data for the 40-65yr old population distinctly. There are few articles focusing on this population and more focused research on them would be beneficial as the population continues to get older and outgrow the younger generations in terms. of size.

Now more than ever, more research on our aging population is needed.