---
aliases: "Health Insurance is good"
description: "This page discusses the benefits of having consistent health coverage in the US"
enableTOC: true
draft: false
---

# The Benefits of Having Health Insurance

Health insurance plays a critical role in supporting the health and well-being of adults as they age. Older adults are more likely to manage [[Chronic Conditions]], navigate complex treatment plans, take multiple prescription medications, and require regular [[Preventive Care|preventative care]], making reliable and affordable health coverage especially important. Research shows that having health insurance is associated with improved health outcomes, including lower rates of mortality and morbidity, increased use of preventative services, and better management of chronic illnesses.

## Health insurance leads to more affordable care

Health insurance offers protections against high medical costs from chronic illnesses or unexpected sicknesses and injuries. As a result, individuals with insurance are less likely to accrue high medical debts or delay seeking care because of costs. For example, researchers found that full year Medicaid coverage leads to a significant decrease in out-of-pocket spending for health expenses[^1]. Despite these protections, affordability even for those with health insurance remains a prominent issue due to high premiums, deductibles, and out-of-pocket costs. 

## Association between health insurance and improved health outcomes

**Health insurance not only offers a financial safeguard to people living in the US, but it also reduces mortality, particularly for older to middle-aged adults** and children[^2]. Health insurance coverage is associated with overall better health outcomes and increased access to preventative care, primary care, and affordable prescriptions. For example, one study investigating the effects of Medicaid expansion for adults with disabilities found that that Medicaid expansion lead to significant increases in flu shot recipients, a key indicator of preventative care[^3].

> [!QUOTE] [Institute of Medicine (U.S.), ed. 2002. _Care Without Coverage: Too Little, Too Late_. Insuring Health. National Academy Press.](http://zotero.org/groups/6082085/items/4CF3PS3R)
> "Working-age Americans without health insurance are more likely to receive too little medical care and receive it too late; be sicker and die sooner; and receive poorer care when they are in the hospital, even for acute situations like a motor vehicle crash."

Furthermore, adults with consistent health insurance coverage have lower rates of chronic illness. For example, in the US, cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of mortality and morbidity. Insured adults are more likely to have better resting blood glucose levels, total cholesterol levels, and blood pressures[^5]. Increased access to preventative care, which often includes routine testing for CVD and screening for risk factors, is one factor influencing the relationship between health insurance and reduced morbidity. [[Socioeconomic Status (SES)|Socioeconomic status]] also plays a crucial role in mediating the relationship between insurance status and morbidity[^6]. Additionally, other social and cultural factors, such as access to transportation and affordable health food options, or limited sick leave for some employed individuals, also contribute to disparities in access and utilization of primary care and overall health for people living in the US. 

Similar to CVD, researchers have linked disparities in cancer incidence and mortality in the US to health insurance status. 

> [!QUOTE] [Barrington, David A., Jennifer A. Sinnott, Corinne Calo, David E. Cohn, Casey M. Cosgrove, and Ashley S. Felix. 2020. “Where You Live Matters: A National Cancer Database Study of Medicaid Expansion and Endometrial Cancer Outcomes.” _Gynecologic Oncology_ 158 (2): 407–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygyno.2020.05.018.](http://zotero.org/groups/6082085/items/8EJNPFUN)
> For example, in an academic article titled "Where you live matters" researchers found that "in women aged 53–57, [Medicaid expansion] was associated with earlier stage at diagnosis and improved survival, suggesting that the magnitude of the improvement in insurance coverage may correlate with important clinical outcomes."

Medicaid expansion is associated with earlier-stage cancer diagnosis and lower mortality rates because individuals are more likely to get screened early, seek preventative care, and follow up on suspicious test results. The American Cancer Society reports that concerns about the cost of medical care is a key deciding factor in delaying medical treatment or not receiving cancer screenings. 

> [!NOTE] [Islami, Farhad, Jordan Baeker Bispo, Hyunjung Lee, et al. 2024. “American Cancer Society’s Report on the Status of Cancer Disparities in the United States, 2023.” _CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians_ 74 (2): 136–66. https://doi.org/10.3322/caac.21812.](http://zotero.org/groups/6082085/items/BVNWVXJS)
> Researchers noted that "many of the observed racial, socioeconomic, and geographic disparities in cancer mortality align with disparities in exposure to risk factors and access to cancer prevention, early detection, and treatment, which are largely rooted in fundamental inequities in social determinants of health."

These social, cultural, and economic factors confound rather than exert influence in singular ways, which makes it difficult to devise that interventions to address disparities in cancer prevalence and mortality[^9]. However, one solution the authors present is to increase health insurance coverage because that leads to greater access to cancer prevention and detection programs. 

Overall, health insurance coverage leads to better health outcomes because people do not delay seeking care due to worries about cost, engage in more frequent preventative health behaviors, and are more frequently screening for chronic diseases in later stages of life; yet, uniform health insurance coverage does not eliminate the structural and financial barriers that aging adults face when accessing care. Older adults are more likely to live with chronic conditions and disabilities, making consistent, affordable, and accessible healthcare especially critical. Yet they continue to face challenges related to [[2.1 The High Cost of Healthcare and Insurance in the US for Aging Adults|cost]], [[3.2 Education and Health Insurance Literacy|health system complexity]], transportation, provider availability, and care continuity. These barriers are often exacerbated by [[1.1 The Health Insurance Landscape in the US|fragmented insurance systems]] and [[2.2 Strategies for Financing Health for Aging Adults|employment-linked coverage instability]].

# Footnotes

[^1]: [Creedon, Timothy B., Samuel H. Zuvekas, Steven C. Hill, Mir M. Ali, Chandler McClellan, and Judith G. Dey. 2022. “Effects of Medicaid Expansion on Insurance Coverage and Health Services Use among Adults with Disabilities Newly Eligible for Medicaid.” _Health Services Research_ 57 (S2): 183–94. https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6773.14034.](http://zotero.org/groups/6082085/items/4Y42ZDQW)

[^2]: [Levy, Helen, and Thomas C. Buchmueller. 2025. “The Impact of Health Insurance on Mortality.” _Annual Review of Public Health_ 46 (Volume 46, 2025): 541–50. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-publhealth-061022-042335.](http://zotero.org/groups/6082085/items/UP2EJTMN)

[^3]: [Creedon, Timothy B., Samuel H. Zuvekas, Steven C. Hill, Mir M. Ali, Chandler McClellan, and Judith G. Dey. 2022. “Effects of Medicaid Expansion on Insurance Coverage and Health Services Use among Adults with Disabilities Newly Eligible for Medicaid.” _Health Services Research_ 57 (S2): 183–94. https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6773.14034.](http://zotero.org/groups/6082085/items/4Y42ZDQW)

[^4]: [Institute of Medicine (U.S.), ed. 2002. _Care Without Coverage: Too Little, Too Late_. Insuring Health. National Academy Press.](http://zotero.org/groups/6082085/items/4CF3PS3R)

[^5]: [Metlock, Faith E., Thomas Hinneh, Chitchanok Benjasirisan, et al. 2024. “Impact of Social Determinants of Health on Hypertension Outcomes: A Systematic Review.” _Hypertension (Dallas, Tex.: 1979)_ 81 (8): 1675–700. https://doi.org/10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.123.22571.](http://zotero.org/groups/6082085/items/2M7P8QD4)

[^6]: [McClurkin, Michael A., Leah Rae Yingling, Colby Ayers, et al. 2015. “Health Insurance Status as a Barrier to Ideal Cardiovascular Health for U.S. Adults: Data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES).” _PLOS ONE_ 10 (11): e0141534. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0141534.](http://zotero.org/groups/6082085/items/HNRZ36AJ)

[^7]: [Barrington, David A., Jennifer A. Sinnott, Corinne Calo, David E. Cohn, Casey M. Cosgrove, and Ashley S. Felix. 2020. “Where You Live Matters: A National Cancer Database Study of Medicaid Expansion and Endometrial Cancer Outcomes.” _Gynecologic Oncology_ 158 (2): 407–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygyno.2020.05.018.](http://zotero.org/groups/6082085/items/8EJNPFUN)

[^8]: [Islami, Farhad, Jordan Baeker Bispo, Hyunjung Lee, et al. 2024. “American Cancer Society’s Report on the Status of Cancer Disparities in the United States, 2023.” _CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians_ 74 (2): 136–66. https://doi.org/10.3322/caac.21812.](http://zotero.org/groups/6082085/items/BVNWVXJS)

[^9]: See [[Intersectionality]], [[Syndemic]] & [[3.0 The Social Determinants of Health]]
