---
description: "This page covers the demographics of the uninsured populations in the US, and some unique barriers they face to accessing and utilizing healthcare"
enableTOC: true
draft: false
---

# The Uninsured Population in the US

Many adults experience periods of [[00-Inbox/Uninsured|uninsurance]] earlier in life between the ages of 50 and 65 just before they qualify for Medicare because of life or work transitions. Lack of coverage during this stage can lead to delayed diagnoses, unmanaged chronic conditions, and limited access to preventative services, all of which have consequences for health and longevity[^1]. Understanding the characteristics and causes of uninsurance in the U.S. helps illuminate broader system level barriers that affect health across the life course and provides insight into strategies that can support healthier aging and more equitable access to care.

The uninsured population in the US has significantly declined in the past decade. In 2023, 26 million people in the US lacked health insurance. However, in 2013, the year before the [[Affordable Care Act]] (ACA) went into full effect, over 44 million people in the US were uninsured[^1]. Figure 1 displays the uninsured rate in the US between 2010-2023. The significant decline in the uninsured rate between 2013-2016 is largely due to Medicaid expansion in states that adopted the provision under the ACA.

<iframe
    title="Number of the Uninsured Population 0-64, 2010-2023"
    aria-label="Chart"
    src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/LUhli/1/"
    scrolling="no"
    frameborder="0"
    style="width: 100%; min-width: 900px; height: 550px; border: none;">
</iframe>

Even with ACA options, the perceived or actual cost remains a significant deterrent to obtaining health insurance coverage for many uninsured Americans. Affordability is the leading reason for non-elderly adults remaining uninsured (64.2% in 2022)[^2], while access to employer-sponsored medical benefits varies significantly by occupation, ranging from 52% for service occupations to 94% for management, business, and financial occupations[^3]. Therefore, [[3.1 Socioeconomics|socioeconomic]] status is a crucial component to evaluate  access to health insurance coverage in the US.

<iframe
    src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/J8hLR/1/"
    title="Reasons for Being Uninsured Among Uninsured Nonelderly Adults, 2022"
    aria-label="Chart"
    scrolling="no"
    frameborder="0"
    style="width: 100%; height: 350px; border: none;">
</iframe>

### The Majority of Uninsured Persons in the US are Working Adults

Despite the expanded access spurred by the ACA, coverage gaps and inequity still exists. The population of uninsured people in the US is mainly composed of low-income, working, non-elderly adults living in the southern and western parts of the United States. Figure 2 displays the demographics of the uninsured population in the US. 

<iframe
    title="Interactive DataWrapper Embed"
    aria-label="Chart"
    src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/3hegU/1/"
    scrolling="no"
    frameborder="0"
    style="width: 100%; min-width: 900px; height: 900px; border: none;">
</iframe>

In 2023, over 7 in 10 uninsured people in the US were adults under 65, three quarters lived in southern or western states, and 73.7% had at least one full-time worker in their family[^4]. Another 11.2% of the uninsured population had at least one part-time worker in their family. Similarly, 64% of people covered by Medicaid are working part or full-time[^5]. These statistics disrupt common misconceptions that uninsured people and those covered by Medicaid are unemployed. 

The majority of uninsured adults in the US are low-wage working adults, which points to broader concerns about the accessibility and affordability of employer-sponsored health insurance ([[Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance (ESI)|ESI]]), as "many people across the insurance system, both public and private, have plans that don't provide them with the cost protection needed to get timely care"[^6]. 

<iframe
    src="https://e.infogram.com/31059b6d-6efd-4764-aa44-f0fd896c4df2?src=embed"
    title="State of US Health Insurance 2024 Biennial Survey: Exhibit 2"
    width="100%"
    height="796"
    scrolling="no"
    frameborder="0"
    style="border: none;"
    allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen">
</iframe>

Losing employment often leads to being uninsured or underinsured, making medical treatments, medications, and appointments difficult to afford.

Furthermore, the lack of adequate health insurance coverage and paid sick leave among low-income, working adults exacerbates health challenges because they cannot access reliable care to remain healthy and attend work. These dynamics are especially impactful for low-wage workers with chronic conditions or [[3.3 Disability|disabilities]], because they often do not have reasonable workplace accommodations to support their health and wellbeing[^7]. 

It is pivotal to investigate barriers to coverage for older working adults because of the intertwined relationship between employment and health. Health challenges—such as workplace injuries, prolonged medical leave, or mental illness—are common causes of job loss or extended unemployment and are more prevalent in the aging population. 

#### ACA Gains Meet New Challenges

The implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) marked a historic leap forward in health insurance coverage, addressing long-standing gaps in the U.S. system. The primary engine of this change was the expansion of Medicaid, which brought coverage to millions of adults under 65 since, "[p]rior to the ACA, Medicaid programs varied markedly by state and only covered certain categories of low-income individuals: people older than age 65, some disabled individuals, parents, children, and pregnant women"[^8]. 

The impact was both broad and deep, as research confirms that in states that expanded Medicaid, residents saw significant increases in full-year coverage, better access to primary care, and reduced out-of-pocket spending. For aging adults in particular, the ACA Marketplace created a vital safety net for early retirees, providing an affordable bridge to Medicare.

Despite these landmark achievements, progress has not been linear. Evidence indicates that national gains in healthcare access "plateaued or worsened after 2016" due to "the continuous efforts to undermine the provisions of the ACA since 2017 which, although still limited, have already succeeded in decreasing Medicaid coverage in some states with increased barriers to access to care"[^9]. Though there have been improvements in coverage, recent reports still show that cost remains a significant barrier since there have been "slight increases since 2020 in the share of adults reporting that they did not get medical care or did not take medicine as prescribed due to cost."[^10]

Furthermore, the structure of the law inadvertently "created new forms of exclusion, as access to affordable coverage options were highly segmented by state of residence, income, and citizenship status. In doing so, it built upon a legacy of existing stratification that had long excluded people by class, occupation, race, ethnicity, immigration status, gender, and sexuality"[^8]. 

Rather than a single national system, the ACA established a landscape where access to affordable coverage is heavily segmented and dependent on an individual's state of residence (the Medicaid gap), income level (subsidy cliffs), and citizenship status, leaving significant barriers in place for many vulnerable older adults as they deal with these and other [[Social Determinants of Health|social determinants of health (SDOH)]] that hinder or prevent them from accessing insurance coverage.

## The Effects of Remaining Uninsured

 Being uninsured presents a significant and multifaceted risk to an aging adult's health and financial well-being. While aging itself does not automatically result in an increase in healthcare, it undeniably increases the likelihood of developing [[Chronic Conditions]] and experiencing more acute health issues. Lacking insurance is not a direct indicator of health outcomes, but it does lead to a decrease in preventative care options and an increase in delayed medical care seeking and diagnosis, which both impact the manifestation and exacerbation of poor health and health outcomes[^2].

<iframe
    src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/tWspt/1/"
    title="Percent of Adults Reporting Delaying or Going Without Medical Care Due to Cost, by Selected Characteristics, 2000–2022"
    aria-label="Chart"
    scrolling="no"
    frameborder="0"
    style="width: 100%; height: 550px; border: none;">
</iframe>

Given the high cost of healthcare in the U.S., among other factors like increased [[3.3 Disability|disability]] and retirement, these reasons for lacking insurance forces aging individuals into an impossible dilemma: either forgo necessary medical care and risk severe health complications, or seek treatment and face devastating financial repercussions that could jeopardize their stability and independence. This inescapable vulnerability underscores the critical importance of reliable health coverage for older Americans.

# Footnotes

[^1]: [Garfield, Rachel, Kendal Orgera, and Anthony Damico Published. 2019. “The Uninsured and the ACA: A Primer - Key Facts about Health Insurance and the Uninsured amidst Changes to the Affordable Care Act.” _KFF_, January 25. https://www.kff.org/uninsured/report/the-uninsured-and-the-aca-a-primer-key-facts-about-health-insurance-and-the-uninsured-amidst-changes-to-the-affordable-care-act/.](http://zotero.org/groups/6082085/items/ZEI8ZU4A)

[^2]: [Tolbert, Jennifer, Rakesh Singh, and Patrick Drake. 2024. “The Uninsured Population and Health Coverage.” KFF, May 28. https://www.kff.org/health-policy-101-the-uninsured-population-and-health-coverage/](http://zotero.org/groups/6082085/items/Q2L4XMTJ)

[^3]: [Bureau of Labor Statistics. n.d. “Employee Benefits in the United States Summary - 2024 A01 Results.” Accessed July 21, 2025. https://www.bls.gov/news.release/ebs2.nr0.htm](http://zotero.org/groups/6082085/items/RQQHYQ8E)

[^4]: [Tolbert, Jennifer, Rakesh Singh, and Patrick Drake. 2024. “The Uninsured Population and Health Coverage.” KFF, May 28. https://www.kff.org/health-policy-101-the-uninsured-population-and-health-coverage/](http://zotero.org/groups/6082085/items/Q2L4XMTJ)

[^5]: [Hinton, Elizabeth, and Robin Rudowitz Published. 2025. “5 Key Facts About Medicaid Work Requirements.” _KFF_, February 18. https://www.kff.org/medicaid/issue-brief/5-key-facts-about-medicaid-work-requirements/](http://zotero.org/groups/6082085/items/783KT6SL)

[^6]: [“The State of Health Insurance Coverage in the U.S.” 2024. November 21. https://doi.org/10.26099/byce-qc28).](http://zotero.org/groups/6082085/items/FDSY9CWU)

[^7]: [McArthur, Randi, Jessica Williams, and Shawn Kneipp. 2025. “Workplace Accommodations for Low-Wage Workers: A Scoping Review.” _Work: A Journal of Prevention, Assessment and Rehabilitation_, February 16, 10519815241312597. https://doi.org/10.1177/10519815241312597](http://zotero.org/groups/6082085/items/GZGP35GQ)

[^8]: [Mulligan, Jessica M., and Heide Castañeda, eds. 2018. _Unequal Coverage: The Experience of Health Care Reform in the United States_. New York University Press.](http://zotero.org/groups/6082085/items/V9Y6WCEY)

[^9]: [Caraballo, César, Dorothy Massey, Shiwani Mahajan, et al. 2020. “Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Access to Health Care Among Adults in the United States: A 20-Year National Health Interview Survey Analysis, 1999–2018.” _medRxiv_, November 4, 2020.10.30.20223420. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223420](http://zotero.org/groups/6082085/items/EXKLI6PX)

[^10]: [Rakshit, Shameek, Matthew McGough, Lynne Cotter, and Gary Claxton. 2025. “How Does Cost Affect Access to Healthcare?” _Peterson-KFF Health System Tracker_, April 7. https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/chart-collection/cost-affect-access-care/](http://zotero.org/groups/6082085/items/HPXNAIFR)
