---
tags:
  - team
  - overview
description: This is an overview of the AARP HIC project, outlining its objectives and content.
enableTOC: true
draft: false
---

# Description

This research project investigates disparities in health insurance coverage among individuals aged 40 to 65+ and across various demographic characteristics. The study examines the types of insurance available, how these differences affect access to healthcare services, and whether existing coverage meets the specific health needs. 

Given the increased vulnerability to chronic and age-related conditions during this life stage, the project also aims to identify how these discrepancies impact health disparities and health outcomes. In addition, the research evaluates the implications of these disparities for healthcare organizations providing care to aging populations, identifying areas for further investigation.

# Objective

The objective of this work was to analyze health insurance coverage discrepancies across private insurance, Medicare, Medicaid, and government-sponsored programs for aging adults through demographic variables such as age, gender, race, socioeconomic status, and geographic location.

We aimed to provide an assessment of US Health Insurance Coverage (HIC) with specific focus on identifying and Identifying common and significant discrepancies that impact health care–overall and specifically among demographic segments:

- **Age** 
	- 40 to 49; 50 to 64; and 65+
- **Race/Ethnicity**
	- AA, AAPI, NEMA, Native American, etc.
- **Socioeconomic Status**
	- Household income, employment, etc.
- **Gender** 
	- LGBTQ, 
- **Disability Status**
	- Co-morbidities, degenerative diseases
- **Location**
	- Region, Rural vs Urban, Small Town
- **Education**
	- Health and health insurance literacy

The ultimate goal was to provide actionable insights for healthcare organizations and policymakers to improve equitable access to insurance coverage and healthcare services for middle-aged adults.

# Methods

GrayMatters employed a multi-faceted approach, combining a comprehensive literature review with the analysis of secondary data sources. This includes examining peer-reviewed journals, government reports, and healthcare industry publications. 

By analyzing patterns across private insurance, Medicare, Medicaid, and other government-sponsored programs, the research highlights how coverage discrepancies correlate with demographic variables such as age, gender, race, socioeconomic status, and geographic location. 

To complete the full project, we adopted a phased approach that combined a literature review with data collection, and analysis. Each phase was designed to build upon the previous one, culminating in a comprehensive understanding of the topic.

Using various software including [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md/) for writing, [Zotero](https://www.zotero.org/) for reference management, Ai tools for refining code and prose, and [Quartz](https://quartz.jzhao.xyz/) for creating a static site, team worked in a tech stack to construct the report that enables readers to engage with the information in a more intuitive manner than a simple word document provides.